
OpenMath Workshop Bremen November 8-9 2003.
===========================================

MS: Mika Seppala
SB: Stephen Buswell
SJ: Sabina Jeschke
TR: Tilman Rassy
OC: Olga Capprotti
PL: Paul Libbrecht
LK: Ladislav Kohout
DC: David Carlisle
AS: Andreas Strotmann
CK: Camelia Kocsis
MG: Marc Gaetano
SD: Stephane Dalmas
RM: Roy McCasland
RA: Romeo Angelache
WN: Winfried Neun
MD: Mike Dewar
JZ: Juergen Zimmer
MK: Michael Kohlhase



Intro: Michael Kolhase

General Admin.
Best wishes to James Davenport who can't be present.

Session 1: Chair Mike Dewar




Andreas Strotmann: Content Markup: principles and consequences.
Summary of dissertation (full dissertation available from FSU).

1st attended was workshop 10 years ago, 2nd OM workshop.

3 main chapters

Linguistics approach.
Comparison with "engineering approach" to study of natural language

The compositionality principle
ie that the meaning of a compound is a function of the meaning of its
parts and its syntactic constructors.
Especially notes on binding operators.


Categorical (structural) semantics


Focus on points that could influence OM2 and have influenced MML22e.




Qns.
OC qn about other work using natural language to describe mathematics
and elearning environments.
MK: pointed out that languages between people have different
requirements than languages between machines (large inference
capability and unreliable communication channel).




Session 2: Chair Marc Gaetano
Romeo Angelache: Hermes a LaTeX to XML converter and authoring tool.
Documentation available on the web.

Hermes has a set of macros to allow author to specify meaning of
formulae which allows dvi to be semantically enhanced.
hermes compiler then produces XML.

Qn
OC have you considered docbook (answer OMDoc and docbook both
considered and one of these will replace current mowgli experimental
markup, hope to complete this, and mml presentation by April next year.)
MK converting between xml document formats easily done by xslt.
PL: dangerous to imply such conversions are easy. Better to arrange
output meets some standard. Answer use stylesheets but system will
come with stylesheets for these conversions.

Jürgen Jimmer: Brokering of Theorem proving services described in
MSDL.
Applying MSDL (Monet/MathBroker) to deduction reasoning systems.
Developing ontologies for deductive services,.
Mathweb software bus developed at saarbruken, provides homogeneous
interface to several services to clients. Clients have to know which
system they want to use and how to access it.
User has to coordinate different reasoning systems.
Moving to a semantic mathweb..
based on FIPa and agents offering services described by a service
description language (msdl, in the future perhaps owl-s)

using protege-2000. describing tp in msdl using the ontology, then
mapping msdl to java classes. Implementing simple brokering.


Qn: Asked about splitting problems to subproblems that could be
classified. Answer, in future plans, but currently not feasible.
AS pointed out that work had been done at Nice in this area.
OC: is the ontology just for First Order TP. Answer currently yes.
OC: Any ideas on extensions to HO TP. 
MK: the two HOTP available aren't that different in behaviour to the
FO TP. Integrating proof checkers might be harder.


Tilman Rasy: mmtex (TeX to XML converter)
MUMIE (e-learning project for engineers)
Content is stored in XML database, but authors used to LaTeX.
Decided to develop own converter.
latex-like code to xml
written in perl, does not rely on latex being installed.
perl good for writing extensible parsers for text.
very Customisable no commands except \documentclass hard coded in core
sources. everything in exchangeable libraries controlled by
documentclass.
two dialects currently implemented
One similar to standard latex, other specialised one for MUMIE.
Non mathematical parts converted to in house XML, Mathematical parts
Presentation MML.
XSLT to XHTML+MML.

Qns:
Some discussion on further requirements for e-learning systems
MK: qns about extensibility of parsing with respect to special tex
features such as catcodes. (catcodes not supported, \newcommands are
supported) 

Lunch


OM2 session
Chair: Olga Caprotti
Overview of OpenMath 2 draft: Mike Dewar.

Qns

MK since binary encoding is about compactness, should a binary encoder
do maximal sharing, Spec says all sharing variants are
equivalent, but pragmatically should we have modes to control whether
or not same DAG is preserved. Which means marking private or public
sharing.

PL: does anyone use binary encoding
MK: a lot of interest in binary encoding, esp grid usage.
OC CA will not use xml encoding due to file sizes.
MK parsing time, first unzip then parse the costs time.
Not really disk space.
AS: should there be abstract data model for signature files and cd
groups.
MK currently not done for CD groups.
AS: would like binary encoding be able to represent arbitrary om
object. size limits, eg 2^31 digits in integer. Would give
possibilities for streaming  large objects without knowing the size in
advance.
MK: integers, bytearrays and strings and foreign objects
MK: note that current draft grammar uses "derived" instead of
"foreign".
MK additional mechanism to have explicit start tag and end tag
instead of giving length
SD there may be problems of finding an end tag given current
mechanisms.
MK: which version is the original.
DC: suggested following w3c policy author in an xml dtd (docbook or
us) but make xhtm+mathml version normative.


Chair: MS
MK: extending OMBIND with a restriction element
Proposal to add a version of OMBind that allows restricted scope for the
bound variables.
MD: question about restrictions for more than one variable.
Ans restriction can refer to all the binding ops.
AS: MathML has this, also note that the restrictions have scope.

MK for Enesto. A proposal from Reinaldo Barr: getting rid of the OMOBJ
tag. It always has exactly one child.

Qn
SB: not really a problem
DC: MML spec examples dont use omobj
MK: suggest clarify spec mechanisms for embedding in other xnl
languages.
ML pointed out that there there are issues with version attribute on
omobj.



Mike Dewar for James. A proposal for DefMPs
2 kinds of props CMP and FMP.
4 kinds of OMS
mathematicaly primitive FMPs describe symbol, Primitive from an OM
point of view, FMPs describe symbol, Defined in terms of other OMS,
FMPs define the symbol, defined recursively FMP define evaluation of
symbol recursively.'proposal distinguish descriptive, defining,
evaluating FMPs by optioal attribute on FMP.

Qn
MK: is this a suggestion to change the abstract model, or concrete CD.
MK change to abstract model.
Roy Mc: Mathematical gain restricted if you only have one definition
as there are often many definitions and difficult to make a single
defn.
MK: OMDoc can do that, but overheads are quite high.
MK: uniqueness constraint makes it difficult to allow mutual recursion.
PL: don't you have relationships with types/multiple signatures.
PL: Cds should be written in omdoc.
OC: what is the effect on compliance rules.
MK: systems would be allowed but not forced to replace a symbol by its
definition.


AS: Further proposals for OM2
Make sure all encodings can encode all OM
Compatibility with MML22e.
indexed variables: needs more thought esp. nested binding.
roles must not prohibit symbols from appearing anywhere in an object.
Need to allow reasoning about binders and attributed symbols.

MK confusing layers, the binder symbol can't be applied everywhere,
you can not write exists = not forall not
AS I think its fundamental that this is allowed.

Disallow local reference out of an enclosing binding object.
problems with capture of local variables.
MK valid point but problem of capture "dynamic binding". Needs more
thought. Should at least have a warning.

Binding Objects
remove paragraph on multiple variables. comment on mathml partialdiff use
of multiple variables.

special syntax for type specification?

extend STS to become full fledged categorical type system.


=======
Straw Polls
In favour of proposals for OM2.0                yes   no
Such that                                        3    6
DefMP                                            7    3                              
OMObj optional                                    no vote as something to
                                                  be addressed editorially.
binary encoding streaming changes                6    2
extending STS to a full Structural type system   0
                       



==================
Saturday November 8th

E-learning session, chair: MK

Mika Seppälä: WebALT - Web Advanced Learning Technologies.

[Tomorrow is a remarkable day 10 years to the day that I submitted the
first OpenMath Proposal.]

Shared development of material: an assembly line for courses.
Course Content Definitions.
Roadmap to more effective delivery of hight quality education.

Looking for partners in course creation.

Qns

PL: do you get licence to convert classical books.
answer, don't convert (publishers may do this) but CCD will contain
references to relevant parts of these classical works. 
May be possible to sell these indexes back to publishers.

PL: Notion of CCD surprising, rather than existing standards for
e-learning.
Answer, don't want to re-invent wheel, main aim is to provide the
content, developed own ccd schema as not aware of anything more
suitable but if something better arises, we could use it.

PL: How do you plan to author MML and OpenMath.
Answer, currently producing Presentation MathML from Mathtype.
Hoping to find a convenient free tool to produce content MML, but
currently not available. (For exercise database).

PL: How easy to convince colleagues to share exercises.

MK: Currently even Presentation MML not reusable eg complex engineers
want to use j rather than i.

LK: i to j easy compared to conventions for units etc

OC: Have you considered using Mathematica to develop problem trees.
answer, have considered maple, not done yet, but currently system is
just prototype.


===
Sabina Jeschke: Next generation in e-learning technology: Concepts and
visions for Math and Science.

Overview of projects and interests, necessity of semantic
description of mathematics, defining requirements on semantic
descriptions for e-learning.



qns
MS: status of IP proposal, ans Ranked 3 and suggested for funding but they
only funded 2.

PL: Comment on reusable fine granularity. No current systems, have you
studied the dangers of such granularity restricting contact references
"previous paragraph". Ans: not clear what the glue should be, similar
to giving a talk: talking "between" the slides. Two styles one, fully
automated with no manual teaching, we aim for materials to complement
traditional lectures.

AS: Experience with US is  that students don't have time to do any
exploration outside lecture time.

OC working in Sweden and cooperating with Austria, using VNC allows
cooperation with java tools etc should probably work with cinderella.
Only problem inputting the math. Perhaps writing on a tablet is the
solution. 

LK: We are too idealistic about standards, we assume that if we all use
the same standard we could work together. This does not work in
practice. Also need open source and open architecture otherwise stuck
by incompatible proprietary implementations. (Courses written for
blackboard 5 don't work in version 6)
Ans: all work on the project is open source and linux based for
exactly this reason.


====

PL: Copy and Paste in ActiveMath

Copy and Paste, is math content as easy as text? content level
mathematical objects, ActiveMath, interactive exercises,
pasting OpenMath in MuPad, presentation engine in ActiveMath.

qns
SB: Have you looked at Jome as an input system
Ans only recently licenced, and plan to replace current console with
jome. Currently doesn't have full 2d editing. Also Luca's tex-like
presentation editor.
AS: Techexplorer used to have subformula copy and paste.
Sam Dooley has extension to techexplorer, but techexplorer remains a
non-free system.
MK: copy and paste good application of mathml parallel markup.
OC: Riaca phrasebooks have a mechanism to enlarge codecs.

======

David Carlisle for James. Units and Dimensions in OpenMath.
A review of James Danport's paper on Units, and comparisons with similar
Note from the W3C math WG on Units in MathML.

=============		   
